# Bioinformatics for Influenza Genome Reconstruction: A Hands-On Workshop
# Day 01: View and Modify Files

## Lesson objectives
* Understand the importance of compressing genomic sequence data to conserve storage space and improve efficiency in data storage and transfer.
* Learn to interact with compressed files (`gzip`) using commands such as `gunzip`, `zless`, and `zcat`.
* Practice using common command-line tools (`less`, `cat`, `head`, `tail`) to view the content of files and understand their differences and functionalities.
* Acquire basic text editing skills using the Nano text editor, including creating, opening, editing, saving, and exiting text files from the command line.

## Compressed files
Usually, files that contain genomic sequence data, e.g. `fastq` or `fasta`, are stored compressed to conserve storage space, as genomic data can be vast and storage-intensive. Compression reduces file sizes, making it more efficient to store and transfer genomic data across systems and networks. Additionally, compressed files can lead to faster data retrieval and analysis, enhancing the overall efficiency of genomics research and analysis pipelines.

There are several compression algorithms that create so-called _archives_, which are directories that can contain muliple compressed files and subdirectories. The two most commonly used compression algorithms are 
* `gzip` and 
* `zip` 

The main differences between `gzip` and `zip` archives are:

1. Compression Algorithm: The `gzip` algorithm is optimized for compressing single files. In contrast, `zip` archives can use various compression algorithms, allowing for more flexibility in compression options.

2. File Structure: `gzip` is designed to compress a single file and doesn't support archiving multiple files or directories into a single compressed file without additional tools such as `tar`. On the other hand, `zip` archives can store multiple files and directories within a single archive while maintaining the directory structure, making them suitable for packaging and compressing entire directories.

3. Platform Compatibility: `gzip` is commonly used in Unix-like operating systems and is native to the Unix environment. `zip`, however, is more widely supported across different operating systems, including Windows, Unix-like systems, and macOS, making it a more versatile choice for cross-platform compatibility.


```bash
# Go to nambi24/day01

# Copy the file ERR10453087.fastq.gz from nambi24/data to here

# Find out the file size

# Unzip it
gunzip ERR10453087.fastq.gz

# Check the file size again

```

## Looking through files and variables
You have just unzipped a compressed `fastq` file. 

Please discuss with your neighbor:
* _Describe the organization of data within a `fastq` file, highlighting the significance of each section in the context of genomic data._
* _How do the sequence entries and quality scores interrelate within a `fastq` file, and what do they signify regarding the sequencing process?_

You can see the content of (`fastq`) files directly on the command line. There are several tools available, whereof `less`, `cat`, `head` and `tail` are the most commonly used.

``` bash
# Go to nambi24/day01

# Copy the file ERR10453087.fastq.gz from nambi24/data to here

# Use less
less ERR10453087.fastq

# Use cat
cat ERR10453087.fastq

# Use head
head ERR10453087.fastq

# Use tail
tail ERR10453087.fastq

# Re-zip the file
gzip ERR10453087.fastq

```

* _How can you quit less?_ 
* _What are the differences between those command? Use the ```--help``` directive to get further information._


## Working with (g)zipped files
You can use `zless` and `zcat` to view the content of compressed files without actually unzipping them.

```bash
# Go to nambi24/day01

# View the zipped file - What do you see?
cat ERR10453087.fastq.gz

# Clear your terminal

# View the unzipped file without unzipping
zcat ERR10453087.fastq.gz 

# Clear your terminal

# View the head of a gzipped file
zcat ERR10453087.fastq.gz | head

# View the tail
zcat ERR10453087.fastq.gz | tail


```
* _What is the difference in the output between `cat` and `zcat`?_
* _What is the use of `|` (pipe)?_


## Modify files with Nano
Nano is a command-line text editor that provides a simple interface for users to create, edit, and modify text files directly within a terminal window. It offers basic functionality similar to other text editors, such as opening, saving, searching, and replacing text. Nano does not have a mouse, it is text only, this means that you have to use the keys to navigate within the file that is currently open.

Before you try out Nano to open a file, make yourself familiar with the necessary shortcuts:

1. Ctrl + G: Access the help menu for Nano in Nano.
2. Ctrl + X: Exit Nano (with the option to save changes if any).
4. Ctrl + W: Search for a specific string in the text.
5. Alt + 6: Copy the selected text.
6. Ctrl + U: Paste the copied text.
7. Ctrl + K: Cut the current line of text.
8. Alt + U: Undo the previous command.
9. Alt + E: Redo the previous command.


```bash
# Navigate to nambi24/day01

# Create a new file
touch my_text_file.txt

# Open the text file with Nano
nano my_text_file.txt
```

* _Type in some text, such as "Hello World!". Save the file and exit Nano. Show the content of the file in the command line._ 

* _Edit the existing file, navigate to a specific line and make changes to the text, such as adding your favorite animal to the second line. Save and exit. Verify by showing the content of the file in the command line._

* _Edit the existing file, by copying your favorite animal and pasting it to the next line. Save and verify._ 