# 2024 IGS Summer School in Berlin: Linux Recap

## Overview
* Allocated time: 45 min

## Learning Objectives
* Recap the most important `bash` commands that are essential for using the command line in Bioinformatics. 

## Exercises

### Handling SARS-CoV-2 sequence data files
0. Create a new directory named `data` inside the `day1` directory, which is located in the `$HOME/suschool24` path. 

    Change your current working directory to the newly created `data` directory.

1. Download a SARS-CoV-2 `fastq` file. 

    The command below downloads an Ion Torrent S5 `fastq` file from European Nucleotide Archive (ENA). This file contains the whole genome sequencing data of SARS-CoV-2.

```bash
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR121/077/SRR12132977/SRR12132977.fastq.gz 
```
    
<details>
<summary>Open me after downloading </summary>
Ooops, you accidently messed up the download. There is already a <code>data</code> directory in <code>$HOME/suschool24</code>. Move the SARS-CoV-2 file to <code> $HOME/suschool24/data</code>.

1.1 Create a new directory named <code>SC2</code> inside the <code>$HOME/suschool24/data</code> directory.

1.2 Move the file <code>SC2_SRR12132977.fastq.gz</code> to the newly created <code>SC2</code> directory.

1.3 Delete the <code>data</code> directory inside <code>$HOME/suschool24/day1</code>
</details>

2. Inspect the first 4 lines of this `fastq` file without decompressing.

    How large is `SC2_SRR12132977.fastq.gz`? Explain the structure of a `fastq` file entry.

3. Make a copy of that file. 

    Open the copied file and rename the first sequence identifier to an arbritrary name. 
    
    Verify the changes by printing the head of both the original and the modified files to the command line. 

4. Report the number of sequences in one of the files.

5. Document your previous commands by exporting your command history to a text file.