# Bioinformatics for Influenza Genome Reconstruction

## Synopsis

## Basic commands

### Your first command
Remember: Each command that you execute on the command line is interpreted as a program by the shell. Most command line tools use parameters. Tools and parameter(s) are separated by " " (space), that's why using spaces in file names is not recommended. 

1. Log in to your laptops and connect to the Wifi.
2. Open a terminal.
3. Type the following command and press enter:

```bash
ls
```

_What do you see?_

### List file content
The command `ls` lists the content of a folder.

```bash
# List folder content of the current directory
ls

# List the content of the current directory
ls .

# List the content of the topfolder
ls ..

# List detailed information of the content the current folder
ls -l
```

### Access Documentation
Each program is shipped with a manual (also known as help page or documentation). The documentation of a command is accessible via `man` or `--help`.

```bash
# Manual of ls command
man ls

# Manual of ls command
ls --help
```

_Find the parameter that_

* _prints detailed information of the content in the current folder._
* _prints the size of files and folders in human-readable format of the content in the current folder. What does human-readable format mean?_
* _sorts the content in the current folder by time, newest first._

### Auto-completion
You may have noticed that utilizing the command line often entails extensive typing. This is why there exist several convenient shortcuts that can significantly streamline your workflow, making your experience much more efficient.

Try the following:

* _Use the arrows up and down of your keyboard. What do you see?_
* _Type ```cle``` and then hit the tab key. What happens?_

Please bear in mind that all Linux-based systems are case-sensitive, indicating that `CLEAR` does not equate to `clear`. Be smart and use auto-completion to avoid typos! It makes your life much easier.

