# Bioinformatics for Influenza Genome Reconstruction

## Synopsis

## View and modify files

### Looking through files and variables
You can read files without opening them in an explorer by printing (=viewing) their content to the terminal. There are several ways to 

``` bash
# Go to nambi24/day01

# Copy the file ERR10453087.fastq.gz from nambi/data 

# Unzip it
gunzip ERR10453087.fastq.gz

# Use less
less ERR10453087.fastq

# Use cat

# Use head

# Use tail

# Re-zip the file
gzip ERR10453087.fastq

```
* _How can you quit less?_ 
* _What are the differences between those command? Use the ```--help``` directive to get further information on the commands._
* _Which information does a `fastq` file contain?_


### Working with (g)zipped files
File sizes in genomics are huge, often spanning gigabytes or even terabytes in size. To mitigate storage demands, these files are commonly compressed, typically using the gzip format. Compressed files, such as those generated in genomic analysis, contain binary data and are typically inaccessible to standard text-based tools. On Linux, zipped files have as file suffix `.gz` oder `.zip`.
 

However, you can effectively inspect gzipped files directly from the command line without the need to decompress them, using the following commands:

```bash
# Go to nambi24/day01

# View the zipped file
cat ERR10453087.fastq.gz

# Clear your terminal

# View the unzipped file without actually unzipping
zcat ERR10453087.fastq.gz 

# Clear your terminal

# View the head 
zcat ERR10453087.fastq.gz | head

# View the tail

```
* _What is the difference in the output between `cat` and `zcat`?_
* _What is the use of `|` (pipe)?

```bash
# Find out the size of the file ERR10453087.fastq.gz 
# Hint: Use ls

# Unzip
gunzip ERR10453087.fastq.gz 

# Compare the file size to the unzipped file size

# Zip the file
gzip Ecoli/SRR16212259.fastq.gz

# Verify

```


### Modify files with Nano
Nano is a command-line text editor that provides a simple interface for users to create, edit, and modify text files directly within a terminal window. It offers basic functionality similar to other text editors, such as opening, saving, searching, and replacing text. Nano does not have a mouse, text only, this means that you have to use the keys to navigate within the file that is currently open.

Before you try out Nano to open a file, make yourself familiar with the necessary shortcuts:

1. Ctrl + G: Access the help menu for Nano in Nano.
2. Ctrl + X: Exit Nano (with the option to save changes if any).
4. Ctrl + W: Search for a specific string in the text.
5. Alt + 6: Copy the selected text.
6. Ctrl + U: Paste the copied text.
7. Ctrl + K: Cut the current line of text.
8. Alt + U: Undo the previous command.
9. Alt + E: Redo the previous command.


```bash
# Navigate to nambi24/day01

# Create a new file
touch my_text_file.txt

# Open the text file with Nano
nano my_text_file.txt
```

* _Type in some text, such as "Hello World!". Save the file and exit Nano. Show the content of the file in the command line._ 

* _Edit the existing file, navigate to a specific line and make changes to the text, such as adding your favorite animal to the second line. Save and exit. Verify by showing the content of the file in the command line._

* _Edit the existing file, by copying your favorite animal and pasting it to the next line. Save and verify._ 