# Bioinformatics for Influenza Genome Reconstruction: A Hands-On Workshop
# Day 04: Basic tools - Mapping

## Lesson Objectives
* Learn to utilize minimap2 to map against a pangenome of influenza

In this lesson we will map our toy example `ERR1178743` or `s1`, as it will be called for the rest of the lesson, to the the influenza pangenome. We will use the tools minimap2 to do the mapping and `samtools` to perform some filtering. In order to use these tools we will have to activate the conda environment.

### Set up the correct environment

```bash
# look at all conda environments available to you
conda info --envs
# activate the "map" environment
conda activate map
# see that the minimap2 software is available to you
minimap2 --version
``` 

### Mapping

We use `minimap2` with the parameters `-a`, this ensures that the output is in SAM format. We also use the `-x map-ont` parameter. This tells minimap2 that we want to map Nanopore data, this helps minimap2 to use set a few parameters which work best with the error model of Nanopore reads. If you would run the command without the redirection `> s1.sam` all the mapped reads would be put out to the terminal.
```bash
# utilize minimap2
minimap2 -a -x map-ont /home/mf1/nambi24/flu-workflow/refs/download/Pan_Influenza_refseq_genomes.fna.gz s1.fastq.gz -o s1.sam
``` 

We use `SAMtools` to handle mapped reads in many different ways. At this stage you can look at the `s1.sam` file and see where your reads mapped. We now want to filter reads to only have primary alignments, i.e. the positions where your reads mapped the best. We will use the argument `-F 2304`, we will look at the flags in detail after. With the argument `-q 50` we also filter out reads with low mapping quality. The argument `-S` signifies that the input file is in SAM format. The `-b` argument tells `samtools` that we want output in BAM format and `-o s1.filtered.bam` is one way to tell samtools to put the results in `s1.filtered.bam`.

```bash
# filter reads
samtools view -F 2304 -q 50 -bS s1.sam -o s1.filtered.bam 
```

The following steps are necessary because other software expects that the reads in the bam file are sorted. Furthermore for easy access to individual mapped reads within the bam file we need to calculate an index with `samtools index`.

```bash
# sort reads
samtools sort s1.filtered.bam -o s1.filtered.sorted.bam
# index reads
samtools index s1.filtered.sorted.bam

# what new file was generated?
```



