# Bioinformatics for Influenza Genome Reconstruction: A Hands-On Workshop
# Day 04: Advanced tools - awk, bcftools

## Lesson Objectives
* Learn to utilize bcftools to create a reference based assembly

In this lesson we will use `samtools` again and we will combine the previous results with the command `bcftools consensus` to generate an assembly. Here we will finally build a fasta file which could be uploaded to GISAID.

### Set up the correct environment

```bash
# look at all conda environments available to you

# IF it was not done before, you have to install the bcftools environment here
conda env create -n bcftools -f /home/mf1/nambi24/flu-workflow/envs/bcftools.yaml

# activate the "bcftools" environment

# see that bcftools is available to you
bcftools --version
``` 

### Generate an assembly

We will now use a combination of tools to first find only those positions in the Pan-Influenza genome where we have a high enough coverage, or rather we will find those positions with low coverage and mask them when we generate the assembly. We will then "apply" the variants that we found to the Pan-Influenza genome and mask the positions with low coverage.

#### Calculate coverage of every position

We will use `samtools depth` to get the coverage of each position. The `--aa` argument signifies that we want get output for every position, even if there is not a single read mapping to it.

```bash
# get coverage of each position
samtools depth -aa s1.filtered.sorted.bam -o s1_depth.tsv
```


#### Get the mask

In the following we will use `awk` to only get those positions where we have a coverage of less than 10. Understanding this command in detail would require too much explanation, but remember that `awk` is a powerful command line tool that you can use if you want perform a simple function on each line of tabular file.

```bash
# look at the first ten lines of s1_depth.tsv
head s1_depth.tsv

# get the mask
awk '$3<10{print $1"\t"$2}' s1_depth.tsv > s1_mask.tsv

# look at the first ten lines of s1_mask.tsv
```

#### Calculate assembly

Finally we are ready to calculate an assembly. We will provide the mask we just generated at `--mask`, the reference genome at `-f` and we provide the variants we calculated earlier.

```bash
# calculate assembly
bcftools consensus --mask s1_mask.tsv -f Pan_Influenza_refseq_genomes.fna s1.clair/merge_output.vcf.gz -o s1_assembly.fasta
```
